.. $Id$
  
..
  This file is part of pyFormex 0.8.9  (Fri Nov  9 10:49:51 CET 2012)
  pyFormex is a tool for generating, manipulating and transforming 3D
  geometrical models by sequences of mathematical operations.
  Home page: http://pyformex.org
  Project page:  http://savannah.nongnu.org/projects/pyformex/
  Copyright 2004-2012 (C) Benedict Verhegghe (benedict.verhegghe@ugent.be)
  Distributed under the GNU General Public License version 3 or later.
  
  
  This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
  it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
  the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
  (at your option) any later version.
  
  This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
  but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
  MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
  GNU General Public License for more details.
  
  You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
  along with this program.  If not, see http://www.gnu.org/licenses/.
  
  

.. include:: defines.inc
.. include:: links.inc



.. _sec:running:

Running pyFormex
================

To run pyFormex, simply enter the command ``pyformex`` in a terminal
window. This will start the Graphical User Interface (GUI), from where
you can launch examples or load, edit and run your own scripts.

The installation procedure may have installed into your desktop menu or even
have created a start button in the desktop panel. These provide convenient
shortcuts to start the GUI by the click of a mouse button.

The program takes some optional command line arguments, that modify the
behaviour of the program. Appendix :ref:`sec:options` gives a full list of
all options. For normal use however you will seldom need to use any of them.
Therefore, we will only explain here the more commonly used ones.

By default, sends diagnostical and informational messages to the terminal from
which the program was started. Sometimes this may be inconvenient, e.g. because
the user has no access to the starting terminal. You can redirect these messages
to the message window of the GUI by starting pyformex with the command 
``pyformex --redirect``. 
The desktop starters installed by the installation procedure use
this option.

In some cases the user may want to use the mathematical power of without the
GUI. This is e.g. useful to run complex automated procedures from a script file.
For convenience, will automatically enter this batch mode (without GUI) if the
name of a script file was specified on the command line; when a script file name
is absent, start in GUI mode. Even when specifying a script file, You can still
force the GUI mode by adding the option --gui to the command line.


.. _sec:options:


Command line options
====================

The following is a complete list of the options for the pyformex command.This
output can also be generated by the command ``pyformex --help``.


.. include:: pyformex.help
   :literal:


.. _sec:nogui:


Running without the GUI
=======================

If you start with the ``--nogui`` option, no Graphical User Interface is created.
This is extremely useful to run automated scripts in batch mode. In this
operating mode, will interprete all arguments remaining after interpreting the
options, as filenames of scripts to be run (and possibly arguments to be
interpreted by these scripts). Thus, if you want to run a script myscript.py in
batch mode, just give the command pyformex myscript.py.

The running script has access to the remaining arguments in the global list
variable *argv*. The script can use any arguments of it and pop them of the
list. Any arguments remaining in the *argv* list when the script finishes, will
be used for another execution cycle. This means that the first remaining
argument should again be a script.

.. End

